# DNA:RNA immunoprecipitation

## Material

|Lysis bufer                     |          
|:-------------------------------|
|100 mM NaCl                     |
|10 mM Tris pH 8                 |
|25 mM EDTA pH 8                 |
|0.5 % SDS                       |
|10ug/ml Proteinase K (add fresh)|

|10x Binding buffer              |
|:-------------------------------|
|100 mM Na3PO4 pH 7*             |
|1.4 M NaCl                      |
|0.5 % Triton-X                  |

  (*) 1M Na3PO4 pH7 (can be prepared by adding 39 ml NaH2PO4 (276 g/L) with 61 ml of Na2HPO4 (284 g/L) and 100 ml H2O)

|TE buffer                       |
|:-------------------------------|
|10 mM Tris pH8                  |
|1 mM EDTA                       |

|ELution buffer                  |
|:-------------------------------|
|50 mM Tris pH8                  |
|10 mM EDTA                      |
|0.5 % SDS                       |

## Genomic DNA extraction and digestion

1. Wash the cells (6 well plate/ per condition) with 1X PBS
2. Harvest cells by trypsinization, spin and wash pellet with 1X PBS.
3. Pellet down the cells again by centrifugation (300g/5min/4°C). 
4. Resuspend in 500ul lysis buffer and incubate at 37-45°C for at least 3 hrs with rotation (start the experiment in the morning, so that you will have longer incubation time with Proteinase K digestion. The longer incubation the better it is. Do not incubate at more than 45°C), if you have large number of cells forming a clump, pass the clump through a needle 0.7mm. Lysis can be done also overnight (sometime better).
5. Perform Phenol-CHCl3 extraction of nucleic acids as follows:
- Add 500 μl Phenol-CHCl3 (pH=8.2, use the bottom layer) and gently invert the tube 4-5 times. Centrifuge at high speed (15000rpm/10min/4°C). 
- Cut 1-ml tip and collect the upper phase into another tube 
- Add 500 μl CHCl3 (to get rid of residual phenol) and gently invert the tube 4-5 times. Centrifuge at high speed (15000rpm/10min/4°C). 
- Add 500 μl isopropanol (with 10% of 3M Sodium acetate pH5.2 to increase yield of DNA precipitation) to the collected upper phase and gently invert the tube 4-5 times. Centrifuge (15000rpm/30min/4°C) and collect DNA pellet 
- Wash the DNA pellet with 1ml 75% EtOH and centrifuge (15000rpm/15min/4°C). 
- Discard EtOH (remove with 1ml pipette, briefly spin tubes, and collect the residual EtOH by 200ul pipette) and dry the nucleic acid with an open tube at 37°C (roughly 1 hour, but check regularly)
6. Add DNase/RNase free water until 500 μl and 50μl 10X Fast Digest buffer (Thermo scientific) and let the tube stay at 37°C for about 15min or so 
7. Add 20U each of EcoRI, BamHI, HindIII, BsrgI, and XhoI and incubate overnight at 37° C

## RNaseH Digestion and purification (version 1) 

8. Divide the samples into two halves (~275 μl) and add 27.5 μl RNaseH buffer in each tube and 40U RNaseH in one of the tubes. 
9. Compensate for the volume of RNaseH in non-RNH digestible samples by adding DNase/RNase-free water. Incubate all samples at 37°C for 3-4 hours with rotation Add RNase/DNase-free water to all samples to make a final volume of 500 μl and perform phenol-chloroform extraction as step 3 
10. Dissolve the pellet in 100 μl RNase/DNase-free water and quantify the yield by nanodrop. 

## RNaseH Digestion and purification (version 2, preferred) 

8. Perform phenol-chloroform extraction as step 3 and quantify yield by nanodrop.
9. Take 5 μg purified product and resuspend in a 135 μl of TE (make duplicate)
10. To one replicate add 15 μl of RNase H buffer and 40U RNaseH (comercial) or 2 μl RNase H (homemade). Fill tubes without RNase up to 150 μl with TE. Incubate all samples at 37°C for 3-4 hours with rotation.
 
## S9.6 DRIP and qPCR

11. Take 5 μg purified product and resuspend in a 500 μl of TE (version 1) or fill the tubes up to 500 μl with TE (version 2). Mix well and take out 50 μl in a separate tube; this will be the input (10%). Add 50 μl 10X binding buffer to the purified products. Different protocols work with various ratios of DNA-antibody beads.
12. Add 3 μg of S9.6 antibody in the remaining 500 μl sample and incubate at 4°C/overnight/rotation (I dilute antibody in 20 μl of 1x binding buffer for easier pipetting)
13. Wash protein A/G magnetic beads in 1x binding buffer. Use magnetic rack to pull down beads and add 1ml of buffer
14. Add 25 μl protein A/G magnetic beads in the IP tubes and incubate at 4°C for 2 hours with rotation 
15. Use a magnetic rack to pull down the beads in the washing steps. 
16. Wash the beads two times with 1ml 1X-binding buffer (15 min/wash). 
17. Wash it once more with TE buffer
18. Add 500 μl elution buffer (+7 μl 20 mg/ml proteinase K), and incubate at 55°C for 45 min 
19. Collect supernatant in a fresh tube and perform phenol-chloroform extraction as step 3, add 1uL of glycogen in the step d. Dissolve the pellet by adding 50 μl TE buffer, and keep it on ice for 15-30 min. Pipette gently 
20. Perform QPCR with 2 μl of the sample

## qPCR (96 WP or 384 WP)

21. Thaw Roche SYBR Green Mastermix (if thawing new, make 1 mL aliquots)
22. Thaw primers (10 μM)
23. Take a well plate and mark some lines that can help you with orientation. For each condition, do a triplicate (important). Think well how to organise it, so it is easy to pipette.
24. Prepare qPCR reaction
- Add Sybr Green into wells, use repeater pipette
- prepare mastermix of primers and water (prepare at least 10% more, there is a lot of dead volume) and add it to the wells (try not to touch drop which is already there to avoid cross contamination)
- add DNA as last (for that I use normal pipette), try not to touch drops already in wells, I pipette it on different sides

|qPCR mix for 96 WP (10 μL)      |
|:-------------------------------|
|SYBR Green Mastermix        5 μL|
|Primer fw                 0.5 μL|
|Primer rv                 0.5 μL|
|DNA                         2 μL|
|Water                       2 μL|

|qPCR mix for 384 WP (8 μL)      |
|:-------------------------------|
|SYBR Green Mastermix        4 μL|
|Primer fw                 0.4 μL|
|Primer rv                 0.4 μL|
|DNA                       1.2 μL|
|Water                       2 μL|

25. Seal well plate with film
26. Spin shortly 1 min at 1000 rpm (centrifuge next to qPCR machine)
27. Perform qPCR (45-50 cycles), use SYBR green template, but adjust annealing temperatures
28. Calculate Ct values from the software (Analysis/Abs quantification/Calculate)
29. Copy Ct values to an excel file and save